Add discoverability section (#227)
precice/precice.github.io: pages/docs/installation/installation-source-discoverability.md

---
title: Building from source - Discoverability
permalink: installation-source-discoverability.html
keywords: configuration, basics, cmake, installation, building, source, bash, profile
toc: false
---

If you installed preCICE in a custom prefix, then one still needs to make it discoverable by the system.

The preCICE library needs to be discoverable in various ways:

1. The location of headers needs to be available during compilation.
   Compilers use hints from `CPATH` if no extra compilation flags were passed to them using `-I`.
2. the shared library needs to be available during linking and execution.
   The dynamic linker uses hints from `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` (`DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` on MacOS X).

> 3. an optional step is to make the preCICE executables available using `PATH`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The location of headers needs to be available during compilation.
   Compilers use hints from `CPATH` if no extra compilation flags were passed to them using `-I`.
2. The shared library needs to be available during linking and execution.
   The dynamic linker uses hints from `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` (`DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` on MacOS X).
3. The preCICE executables need to be in `PATH` (optional, only for additional tools).
```

As this setup can become tedious to maintain, there are some tools that expose the above details.
However, they also need to find preCICE in some way:

> * `pkg-config` and `pkgconfig` use `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` to search for additional `.pc` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `pkg-config` uses `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` to search for additional `.pc` files.
```

Is there a **command/binary** `pkgconfig`? I thought this is only the name of the project.

Author: There are two implementations, which behave slightly differently.

Reviewer: Ah, I didn't know. But then it is pkg-config and pkgconf, right? Or PkgConf. At least according to Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pkg-config#Alternative_implementations

Author: `pkg-config` and `pkgconf` are correct.
Thanks for pointing that out!

* `CMake` uses `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH` for additional installation prefixes.

>   Alternatively one can specify the location of the preCICE configuration file using `precice_DIR`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Alternatively, one can specify the location of the preCICE CMake configuration file using `precice_DIR`.
```

(we already use "preCICE configuration file" too much with the other meaning. Yes, I know, the context is clear to someone that reads the page, but people search and think in unexpected ways)

## Using the shell

> If you are using a Unix-like system, you are using a shell, which is an easy and straight forward way of making preCICE discoverable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using a Unix-like system, you are using a shell, which offers an easy and straight forward way to make preCICE discoverable.
```

Let `PRECICE_PREFIX` be the chosen installation prefix.

> Then add the following to your `.profile` (for bash) or `.zshrc` (for zsh).

Reviewer: Why `.profile` for bash but `.zshrc` for zsh? The corresponding file for bash is `.bashrc`, no?

```bash
PRECICE_PREFIX=~/software/prefix # set this to your selected prefix

> export PATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX/bin:$PATH

Reviewer: I know that this was already like this before, but try `shellcheck` on this. I would at least add double quotes to treat any spaces in the paths.

Author: I just used shellcheck on this. No issues detected.

I expect that spaces aren't an issue as the paths are colon-separated.

Reviewer: Interestingly, this depends on the shell. With `/bin/sh`, shellcheck 0.8.0 complains about the missing double quotes. With `/bin/bash`, it does not.

Since in other places in the documentation (e.g., in [Dependencies](https://precice.org/installation-source-dependencies.html) and in [Installation](https://precice.org/installation-source-installation.html)) we use the variant without quotes, let's stick with that for consistency.

export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

> export CPATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX/include:$CPATH

Reviewer: We also need the C bindings from `$PRECICE_PREFIX/../extras/bindings/c/include`

```suggestion
export CPATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX/include:$PRECICE_PREFIX/../extras/bindings/c/include:$CPATH
```

Author: We install all headers into `<prefix>/include/precice/`, including the C header.

# Enable detection with pkg-config and CMake
export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX/lib/pkgconfig:$PKG_CONFIG_PATH
export CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=$PRECICE_PREFIX:$CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH
```

After adding these variables, please start a new session (open a new terminal or logout and login again).

## Using systemd environment.d

An alternative to the above system is to set these variables in the shell-agnostic [`environment.d`](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/environment.d.5.html).

> Make sure the directory exists:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the directory if it does not yet exist:
```

```terminal
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d/
```

Then create a file `~/.config/environment.d/99-precice.conf` with the content:

```conf
# set this to your selected prefix
PRECICE_PREFIX=$HOME/software/prefix
PATH=${PRECICE_PREFIX}/bin:${PATH}
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${PRECICE_PREFIX}/lib:${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}
CPATH=${PRECICE_PREFIX}/include:${CPATH}
# Enable detection with pkg-config and CMake
PKG_CONFIG_PATH=${PRECICE_PREFIX}/lib/pkgconfig:${PKG_CONFIG_PATH}
CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH=${PRECICE_PREFIX}:${CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH}
```

> After adding the file, please logout and login again.

Reviewer: I don't believe I am the one writing this, but please don't use `please`, as we don't use it elsewhere in the docs :see_no_evil:

## Using directly from the build directory

It may not always be practical to install preCICE repeatedly.
This is especially the case for simultaneous development of preCICE and an adapter.

This method is discouraged as file layouts are fundamentally different and we make guarantees on their locations.
The supported methods of using preCICE from the build directory are using `pkg-config` and `CMake`.

> For `pkg-config`, extend `PKG_CONFIG_PATH` with the binary directory of preCICE.

Reviewer: Add example of this path.

Author: If the user (or dev) doesn't know what a binary directory is, then this method isn't for them.

Reviewer: I thought clarity is always nice, but ok :grimacing:

For `CMake`, set `precice_ROOT` to the binary directory of preCICE.

> 

Reviewer: I think not all adapters support pkgconfig at the moment.

This is my current setup, parts of which are not covered here (even in the "unsafe - don't try this at home" section):

```bash
PRECICE_PREFIX="/home/gc/repos/precice/precice/build"
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH"
export LIBRARY_PATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH"
export CPATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX/src:$PRECICE_PREFIX/../extras/bindings/c/include/:$CPATH"
export INCLUDE_PATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX/../extras/bindings/c/include/:$INCLUDE_PATH"
export PKG_CONFIG_PATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX:$PKG_CONFIG_PATH"
export CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH="$PRECICE_PREFIX:$CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH"
```

Author: Implementing pkg-config in the adapters is quicker than tracing typos in these paths. :see_no_evil:

Author: I reworded the section. Using CPATH etc is not worth it.
Use pkg-config or install to a prefix.
